AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 29 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Estrogen receptor agonism leading to reproductive dysfunction Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Estrogen receptor agonism leading to reproductive dysfunction The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 29, Estrogen receptor agonism leading to reproductive dysfunction in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Professor Tom Hutchinson, School of Biological Sciences, Plymouth, UK [tom.hutchinson{at}plymouth.ac.uk] Dan Villeneuve, US EPA Mid-Continent Ecology Division, Duluth, MN. [villeneuve.dan{at}epa.gov] Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Undefined&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version This AOP was last modified on January 11, 2026 16:56 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Agonism, Estrogen receptor September 11, 2025 15:13 Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning March 20, 2017 17:52 Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations June 24, 2024 13:39 Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver June 24, 2024 13:38 Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition June 24, 2024 13:40 Decrease, Population growth rate January 03, 2023 09:09 Altered, Reproductive behaviour December 03, 2016 16:33 Altered, Larval development December 03, 2016 16:33 Impaired development of, Reproductive organs December 03, 2016 16:33 Agonism, Estrogen receptor leads to Impaired development of, Reproductive organs December 03, 2016 16:37 Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition leads to Altered, Larval development December 03, 2016 16:37 Agonism, Estrogen receptor leads to Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver June 24, 2024 13:04 Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations leads to Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition June 24, 2024 13:23 Agonism, Estrogen receptor leads to Altered, Reproductive behaviour December 03, 2016 16:37 Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver leads to Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations June 24, 2024 13:13 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This AOP describes the linkages between agonism of the estrogen receptor (ER) and population relevant impacts on reproductive function in a range of oviparous vertebrates including amphibia, birds and fish. The information in this AOP for ER agonism does not apply to mammalian species and also not to invertebrates. Amphibians are sensitive to ER agonists during the transformation from larval tadpole to juvenile frog as these include critical periods of metamorphic development and sex differentiation that may be particularly sensitive to endocrine disruption. Larvae exposed to ER agonists during mid-metamorphosis show developmental effects, a subsequent strong female-biased sex ratio which suggests that transient early life-stage exposure to ER agonists can produce effects on the reproductive organs that persist into the beginning of adult life-stages. Birds are also known to be vulnerable to ER agonists causing disruption of estrogen-regulated functions such as sexual differentiation and sexual behaviour. Model species such as the Japanese quail have been widely used as a model for studying various long-term effects after embryonic exposure to ER agonists. In terms of teleost fish, exposure to ER agonists leads to a suite of adverse outcomes depending upon whether exposures occur during or beyond the larval, juvenile and adult life-stages. For example, aquatic exposure to potent ER agonists during the larval and juvenile life-stages may leads to gonadal and renal pathology and skewed-sex ratios in adult fish (potentially 100% females). Larval, juvenile and adult male fish exposed to the same ER agonists display abnormal plasma or whole body levels of vitellogenin (VTG). Cumulative fecundity in adult populations is also adversely affected by ER agonists and this is an important endpoint in the OECD Test Guideline 229 Fish Short Term Reproduction Assay. In summary, this AOP has utility in supporting the application of test methods for detecting ER agonists, or in silico predictions of the ability of chemicals to act as ER agonists and cause impaired sexual development and reproductive dysfunction. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 111 Agonism, Estrogen receptor Agonism, Estrogen receptor KE 78 Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning KE 220 Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations KE 307 Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver KE 252 Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition AO 360 Decrease, Population growth rate Decrease, Population growth rate AO 363 Altered, Reproductive behaviour Altered, Reproductive behaviour AO 339 Altered, Larval development Altered, Larval development AO 364 Impaired development of, Reproductive organs Impaired development of, Reproductive organs Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Agonism, Estrogen receptor leads to Impaired development of, Reproductive organs adjacent High Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition leads to Altered, Larval development adjacent High Agonism, Estrogen receptor leads to Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver adjacent High Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations leads to Increase, Renal pathology due to VTG deposition adjacent High Agonism, Estrogen receptor leads to Altered, Reproductive behaviour adjacent High Increase, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver leads to Increase, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations adjacent High Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence Juvenile High Embryo High Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link fathead minnow Pimephales promelas High NCBI Japanese quail Coturnix japonica High NCBI northern leopard frog Rana pipiens High NCBI medaka Oryzias latipes High NCBI zebrafish Danio rerio High NCBI Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Sex Evidence Male High Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, etc.) and Weight of Evidence (WoE) for the overall AOP as a basis to consider appropriate regulatory application (e.g., priority setting, testing strategies or risk assessment). More help In terms of the criteria associated with Key Events in this AOP, the following observations have been made as shown in parentheses []: 1. concordance of dose-response relationships?; [There is strong dose-response relationship concordance over a wide range of experimental studies using ER agonists in well-defined animals models, including amphibians, birds and fish]; 2. temporal concordance among the key events and adverse effect?; [There is strong temporal concordance from partial and full life-cycle studies using ER agonists in well-defined animals models]; 3. strength, consistency, and specificity of association of adverse effect and initiating event?; [In fish, there is a strong and consistent association between ER agonist exposure, disruption of sexual development an