AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 3 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Inhibition of the mitochondrial complex I of nigro-striatal neurons leads to parkinsonian motor deficits Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Mitochondrial dysfunction and Neurotoxicity The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 3, Inhibition of the mitochondrial complex I of nigro-striatal neurons leads to parkinsonian motor deficits in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Anna Bal-Price, European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy Marcel Leist, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany Stefan Schildknecht, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany Florianne Tschudi-Monnet, University of Lausanne and SCAHT, Lausanne, Switzerland Alicia Paini, European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy Andrea Terron, European Food Safety Authority, Parma Italy (corresponding author: Andrea.TERRON@efsa.europa.eu) - Revision of AOP3 (Project: NP/EFSA/PREV/2024/02 ): Barbara Viviani, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Universit&agrave; degli Studi di Milano, Italy Jo Nyffeler,&nbsp;Department Ecotoxicology | Chemicals in the Environment Research Section, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research-UFZ, Germany Cleo Tebby,&nbsp;Ineris (Institut national de l&rsquo;environnement industriel et des risques),&nbsp;Verneuil-en-Halatte, France Stefan Schildknecht,&nbsp;Hochschule Albstadt-Sigmaringen,&nbsp;Sigmaringen, Germany R&eacute;my&nbsp;Beaudouin,&nbsp;Ineris (Institut national de l&rsquo;environnement industriel et des risques),&nbsp;Verneuil-en-Halatte, France Emma De Fabiani,&nbsp;Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Universit&agrave; degli Studi di Milano, Italy Giacomo Grumelli,&nbsp;Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Universit&agrave; degli Studi di Milano, Italy Milad Mohammadi,&nbsp;Department Ecotoxicology | Chemicals in the Environment Research Section, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research-UFZ, Germany Information specialists: Elena Bernardini, Flavia Rampichini,&nbsp;Universit&agrave; degli Studi di Milano, Italy Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Andrea Terron&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Andrea Terron Clemens Wittwehr Anna Price Barbara Viviani Giacomo Grumelli Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.33 WPHA/WNT Endorsed Scientific Review iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on October 04, 2025 02:11 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) October 03, 2025 09:44 Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) March 28, 2018 04:51 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction February 11, 2026 07:06 Proteostasis, impaired October 16, 2025 02:38 Neuroinflammation July 15, 2022 09:54 Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway October 01, 2025 07:04 Parkinsonian motor deficits March 12, 2018 12:44 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway October 03, 2025 17:52 Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) leads to Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) August 25, 2017 09:35 Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction October 03, 2025 17:14 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Proteostasis, impaired October 03, 2025 04:49 Proteostasis, impaired leads to Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway October 03, 2025 04:34 Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway leads to Parkinsonian motor deficits October 03, 2025 18:38 Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway leads to Neuroinflammation October 02, 2017 10:30 Neuroinflammation leads to Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway August 25, 2017 08:54 MPP+ December 16, 2016 11:22 Rotenone November 29, 2016 18:42 Deguelin October 04, 2025 02:09 Pyrimidifen October 04, 2025 02:11 Fenpyroximate March 06, 2019 10:45 Tebufenpyrad October 04, 2025 02:12 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This Adverse outcome Pathway (AOP) describes the linkage between inhibition of complex I (CI) of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and motor deficit as in parkinsonian disorders. Binding of an inhibitor to complex I has been defined as the molecular initiating event (MIE) that triggers mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired proteostasis, which then cause degeneration of dopaminergic (DA) neurons of the nigro-striatal pathway. Neuroinflammation is triggered early in the neurodegenerative process and exacerbates it significantly. These causatively linked cellular key events result in motor deficit symptoms, typical for parkinsonian disorders, including Parkinson&#39;s disease (PD), described in this AOP as an Adverse Outcome (AO). Since the release of dopamine in the striatum by DA neurons of the Substantia Nigra pars compacta (SNpc) is essential for motor control, the key events refer to these two brain structures. The weight-of-evidence supporting the relationship between the described key events is based mainly on effects observed after an exposure to the chemicals rotenone and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), i.e. two well-known inhibitors of complex I. Data from experiments with these two chemicals reveal a significant concordance in the dose-response relationships between the MIE and AO and within key events (KEs). Also essentiality of the described KEs for this AOP is strong since there is evidence from knock out animal models, engineered cells or replacement therapies that blocking, preventing or attenuating an upstream KE is mitigating the AO. Similarly, there is proved experimental support for the key event relationships (KERs) as multiple studies performed with modulating factors that attenuate (particularly with antioxidants) or augment (e.g. overexpression of viral-mutated &alpha;-synuclein) a KE up show that such interference leads to an increase of KE down or the AO. Information from in vitro and in vivo experiments is complemented by human studies in brain tissues from individuals with sporadic Parkinson&#39;s disease (Keeney et al., 2006) to support the pathways of toxicity proposed in this AOP. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Revision of AOP3 (Project: NP/EFSA/PREV/2024/02 ): Context &ndash; Revision of AOP3: Inhibition of cI leading to parkinsonian motor deficits&nbsp; In 2017, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) started a project aimed at establishing a mechanistic AOP to elucidate the causal relationship between mitochondrial complex I (cI) inhibition and neurotoxic adverse outcomes manifesting in loss of dopamine neurons (EFSA 2017). This resulted in the development of AOP:3 (inhibition of cI leading to parkinsonian motor deficits), which subsequently was endorsed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The initial conceptualization of AOP3 was supported by empirical evidence derived from studies involving rotenone and MPTP/MPP+. Subsequent studies explored whether additional mitochondrial cI inhibitors could trigger similar neurotoxic effects (Table 1). In particular, AOP:3 became a test/pilot case to provide an in vitro point-of-departure (PoD) for an AOP-informed Integrated Approach to Testing and Assessment, concerning a potential risk of Parkinsonian motor deficits after exposure to Tebufenpyrad (Alimohammadi 2022). These open literature publications provide a valid source of data for implementing the biological plausibility, empirical support and quantitative characterisation of the AOP 3. Its implementation is being conducted under a negotiated procedure with EFSA (Reference: NP/EFSA/PREV/2024/02), which is intended to update AOP 3 by incorporating additional evidence into the AOP wiki.&nbsp; Table 1. Application of AOP 3 in studies with regulatory relevance Study &nbsp; Regulatory relevance &nbsp; ETC tested &nbsp; Reference &nbsp; Testing of the in vitro battery aligned with AOP3 &nbsp; Testing the applicability of several assays to form the basis of a consensus mitochondrial toxicity testing platform &nbsp; Inhibition of cI, cII or cIII &nbsp; Delp et al. 2019; van der Stel et al. 2020 &nbsp; Case study on the use of an IATA for identification and characterization of Parkinsonian hazard&nbsp;&nbsp; Read across safety assessment of structurally closely related mitochondrial cI inhibitors&nbsp; Inhibition of cI&nbsp; ENV/JM/MONO(2020)22,&nbsp; van der Stel, W. (2021)&nbsp; Testing the predictivity of the downstream events &nbsp; Testing the inhibitory potency prediction with the aim to understand how far early KE data can and will predict an AO &nbsp; Inhibition of cI, cII or cIII &nbsp; Delp et al., 2021 &nbsp; Calibrate a qAOP to predict downstream KEs&nbsp; cI inhibitors&nbsp; Tebby et al., 2022&nbsp; EFSA Pilot Project on New Approach Methodologies&nbsp; Margins of Internal Exposure Application to Estimated Brain Exposure Compared to In Vitro PoD&nbsp; cI inhibitor&nbsp; Alimohammadi et al. 2023&nbsp; Hazard assessment &nbsp; Identification of the signalling network triggered by mitochondrial perturbation induced by the inhibition of cI, cII or cIII in HepG2 cells &nbsp; Inhibition of cI, cII or cIII &nbsp; Van der Stel et al., 2022 PoD: Poin t of Departure; IATA: Integrated Approaches to Testing and Assessment; cI: complex, I; cII: complex II; cIII: complex III Not endorsed Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of p