AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 273 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Mitochondrial complex inhibition leading to liver injury Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Mitochondrial complex inhibition leading to liver injury The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v2.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 273, Mitochondrial complex inhibition leading to liver injury in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help van der Stel, W. 1 1 Leiden Academic Center for Drug Research, Leiden Univeristy, Leiden, The Netherlands Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Wanda van der Stel&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Wanda van der Stel Marvin Martens Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version This AOP was last modified on February 25, 2025 14:29 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III October 03, 2025 19:05 Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition March 07, 2019 05:15 Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition March 07, 2019 05:21 Decreased, mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation February 04, 2026 03:52 Mitochondrial Injury December 19, 2018 09:37 Necrotic Tissue March 07, 2019 04:19 Liver Injury March 07, 2019 04:23 Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) March 28, 2018 04:51 Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) October 03, 2025 09:44 Proteostasis, impaired October 16, 2025 02:38 Increase, Cell injury/death May 27, 2024 07:23 Binding of inhibitor to mitochondrial complex III June 07, 2019 09:31 Binding of inhibitor to mitochondrial complex IV June 07, 2019 09:31 Binding of inhibitor to mitochondrial complex V June 07, 2019 09:31 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction February 11, 2026 07:06 Increase, Reactive oxygen species June 12, 2025 01:27 Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation March 07, 2019 08:37 Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation March 07, 2019 08:38 Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation March 07, 2019 08:38 Necrotic Tissue leads to Liver Injury March 07, 2019 06:07 Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) leads to Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) August 25, 2017 09:35 Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation June 07, 2019 09:12 Proteostasis, impaired leads to Cell injury/death June 07, 2019 09:28 Cell injury/death leads to Necrotic Tissue March 07, 2019 06:05 Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex III leads to Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III June 07, 2019 09:31 Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex IV leads to Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition June 07, 2019 09:32 Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex V leads to Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition June 07, 2019 09:32 Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction June 15, 2019 11:06 Increase, ROS leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction February 25, 2025 14:26 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Increase, ROS April 11, 2024 15:22 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Proteostasis, impaired October 03, 2025 04:49 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This AOP focusses on the inhibition of any of the mitochondrial complexes (I,II,III,IV or V) which eventually leads to the initiation of liver injury. In short, inhibition (fully or partially) of mitochondrial complexes that form the OXPHOS will lead to perturbation of the OXPHOS itself. OXPHOS perturbation will manifest as lower or no production of ATP via the mitochondria. Besides OXPHOS perturbation, the inhibition of the complexes will also lead to accumulation of the unused electrons and therefore ROS formation. Both process combined will trigger mitochondrial injury. One the most important additions to the AOPwiki by us would be to improve the mitochondrial injury key event with more detail, more method descriptions and more evidence. Finally when a certain threshold is reached mitochondria cannot coop with the induced stress and will trigger the cell death pathways (apoptosis and necrosis depending on ATP availability). Evidently, the cell death will proceed to necrotic tissue and in the end to liver injury. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 1542 Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III MIE 1543 Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition MIE 1544 Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition MIE 888 Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) MIE 887 Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) MIE 1653 Binding of inhibitor to mitochondrial complex III Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex III MIE 1654 Binding of inhibitor to mitochondrial complex IV Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex IV MIE 1655 Binding of inhibitor to mitochondrial complex V Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex V KE 1545 Decreased, mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation KE 1115 Increase, Reactive oxygen species Increase, ROS KE 1547 Mitochondrial Injury Mitochondrial Injury KE 889 Proteostasis, impaired Proteostasis, impaired KE 55 Increase, Cell injury/death Cell injury/death KE 177 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction AO 1548 Necrotic Tissue Necrotic Tissue AO 1549 Liver Injury Liver Injury Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation adjacent High High Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation adjacent High High Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation adjacent High High Necrotic Tissue leads to Liver Injury adjacent High High Binding of inhibitor, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) leads to Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Inhibition, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) leads to Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Proteostasis, impaired leads to Cell injury/death adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Cell injury/death leads to Necrotic Tissue adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex III leads to Inhibition, Mitochondrial complex III adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex IV leads to Mitochondrial Complex IV inhibition adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Binding of inhibitor, mitochondrial complex V leads to Mitochondrial Complex V inhibition adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Decrease in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Increase, ROS leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction adjacent High High Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Increase, ROS adjacent High High Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Proteostasis, impaired adjacent Not Specified Not Specified Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common 