AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 10 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Binding to the picrotoxin site of ionotropic GABA receptors leading to epileptic seizures in adult brain Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Blocking iGABA receptor ion channel leading to seizures The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 10, Binding to the picrotoxin site of ionotropic GABA receptors leading to epileptic seizures in adult brain in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Ping Gong, Edward J. Perkins, US Army Engineer Research and Development Center Email: ping.gong@usace.army.mil or edward.j.perkins@usace.army.mil Point of contact for this AOP entry: Dr. Ping Gong Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Ping Gong&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Ping Gong Edward Perkins Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.15 WPHA/WNT Endorsed Scientific Review iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on April 29, 2023 16:02 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance February 06, 2018 18:35 Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift April 29, 2019 12:32 Occurrence, Epileptic seizure April 29, 2019 12:33 Binding at picrotoxin site, iGABAR chloride channel April 29, 2019 12:27 Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition May 16, 2018 18:42 Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) May 18, 2018 19:18 Binding at picrotoxin site, iGABAR chloride channel leads to Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance April 29, 2019 12:14 Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance leads to Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition April 29, 2019 12:40 Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition leads to Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) May 15, 2018 18:36 Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) leads to Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift May 15, 2018 18:26 Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift leads to Occurrence, Epileptic seizure May 22, 2018 15:38 Picrotoxin November 29, 2016 18:42 Lindane November 29, 2016 18:42 Dieldrin November 29, 2016 18:42 Heptachlor February 11, 2018 00:24 Endosulfan February 11, 2018 00:30 RDX November 29, 2016 18:42 Fipronil November 29, 2016 18:42 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This AOP begins with a molecular initiating event (MIE) where a chemical binds to the picrotoxin binding site at or near the central pore of the ionotropic GABA receptor complex causing blockage of the ion channel. As a result, the first key event (KE)&nbsp;is a decrease in inward chloride conductance through the ligand-gated ion channel. This leads to the second KE, a reduction in postsynaptic inhibition, reflected as reduced frequency and amplitude of spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic current (sIPSC) or abolishment of GABA-induced firing action in GABAergic neuronal membranes. Consequently, the resistance of excitatory neurons to fire is decreased, resulting in the generation of a large excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), i.e., the third KE.&nbsp;The large EPSP is reflected as a&nbsp;spike (rise) of intracellular Ca 2+ observed in the affected region, where a large group of excitatory neurons begin firing in an abnormal, excessive, and synchronized manner. Such a giant Ca 2+ -mediated excitatory firing (depolarization) causes voltage-gated Na + to open, which results in action potentials. The depolarization is followed by a period of hyper-polarization mediated by Ca 2+ -dependent K + channels or GABA-activated Cl &minus; influx. During seizure development, the post-depolarization hyperpolarization becomes smaller, gradually disappears, and is replaced by a depolarization. This characteristic depolarization-shrinking hyperpolarization sequence&nbsp;of events represents the fourth KE known as &ldquo;paroxysmal depolarizing shift&rdquo; (PDS), which forms a &ldquo;seizure focus&rdquo;. A PDS is, essentially, an indication of epilepsy at the cellular level, which serves as the foci to initiate the adverse outcome at the organismal level of epileptic seizure. The severity of symptoms is often dose- and duration- dependent, while the toxicological symptoms are associated with the type and location of affected iGABARs. Mortality can occur if the individual sustains a prolonged or pronounced convulsion or seizure. Neurotoxicity, of which seizures&nbsp;are&nbsp;an end point, is a regulated outcome for chemicals. This AOP allows for screening chemicals for the potential to cause neurotoxicity through the use of in vitro assays that demonstrate binding to the picrotoxin site, electrophysiological assays demonstrating depolarization of neuronal membranes, or electroencephalography that records electrical activity of the adult brain. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Ionotropic GABA receptors (iGABARs) are ligand-gated ion channels which play important functional roles in the nervous system. As the major player in inhibitory neurotransmission, iGABARs are widely distributed in&nbsp;both vertebrates and invertebrates (McGonigle&nbsp;and Lummis 2010; Garcia-Reyero et al . 2011). In vertebrates, the iGABAR includes two subclasses of fast-responding ion channels, GABA A receptor (GABA A -R) and GABA C receptor (GABA C -R). Invertebrate iGABARs do not readily fit the vertebrate GABA A /GABA C receptor categories (Sieghart 1995). The majority of insect iGABARs are distinguished from vertebrate GABA A receptors by their insensitivity to bicuculline and differ from GABA C -Rs in that they are subject to allosteric modulation, albeit weakly, by benzodiazepines and barbiturates (Hosie et al . 1997). Chemical interactions with iGABARs can cause a variety of pharmacological and neurotoxicological effects depending on the location of the active or allosteric site affected. Three distinct types of interactions at binding sites on iGABARs can antagonize the postsynaptic inhibitory functions of GABA and lead to epileptic seizures and death. These three types of interactions correspond to three AOPs (Gong et al . 2015). One of the three types of&nbsp;interaction is non-competitive channel blocking at the picrotoxin convulsant site located inside of the iGABAR pore that spans neuronal cell membranes, which is the MIE described in the current AOP. The other two types of interactions are negative modulation at allosteric sites and competitive binding at the active orthosteric sites (MIEs to be developed in the future). It is worth noting that there exist another class of GABA receptors called metabotropic G-protein-coupled receptors (mGABAR) or GABA B receptors. This AOP is not applicable to GABA B receptors because they mediate slow and sustained inhibitory responses to GABA and are involved in absence epilepsy (Han et al. 2012). Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 667 Binding at picrotoxin site, iGABAR chloride channel Binding at picrotoxin site, iGABAR chloride channel KE 64 Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance KE 669 Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition KE 682 Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) KE 616 Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift AO 613 Occurrence, Epileptic seizure Occurrence, Epileptic seizure Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Binding at picrotoxin site, iGABAR chloride channel leads to Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance adjacent High High Reduction, Ionotropic GABA receptor chloride channel conductance leads to Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition adjacent High High Reduction, Neuronal synaptic inhibition leads to Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) adjacent High Moderate Generation, Amplified excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) leads to Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift adjacent Moderate Moderate Occurrence, A paroxysmal depolarizing shift leads to Occurrence, Epileptic seizure adjacent High Moderate Network View This network graphic is automatically generate