AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 40 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Covalent Protein binding leading to Skin Sensitisation Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Skin Sensitisation AOP The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 40, Covalent Protein binding leading to Skin Sensitisation in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Wiki entry based on OECD Series on Testing and Assessment no 168 (4th May 2012) Corresponding Authors: Sharon.MUNN(at)ec.europa.eu Brigitte LANDESMANN, Coralie.DUMONT Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Undefined&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Brigitte Landesmann Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.1 WPHA/WNT Endorsed This AOP was last modified on April 29, 2023 16:02 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Covalent Binding, Protein November 05, 2020 18:40 sensitisation, skin November 29, 2016 19:28 Activation, Keratinocytes September 16, 2017 10:15 Activation, Dendritic Cells December 03, 2020 10:15 Activation/Proliferation, T-cells November 05, 2020 19:14 Covalent Binding, Protein leads to Activation, Keratinocytes December 03, 2016 16:38 Covalent Binding, Protein leads to Activation, Dendritic Cells November 05, 2020 18:09 Activation, Keratinocytes leads to Activation, Dendritic Cells December 03, 2016 16:38 Activation, Dendritic Cells leads to Activation/Proliferation, T-cells August 22, 2022 13:46 Activation/Proliferation, T-cells leads to sensitisation, skin December 03, 2016 16:38 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help Skin sensitisation is a term used to denote the regulatory hazards known as human allergic contact dermatitis or rodent contact hypersensitivity, an important health endpoint taken into consideration in hazard and risk assessment of chemicals. Skin sensitisation is an immunological process that is described in two phases: the induction of sensitisation and the subsequent elicitation of the immune reaction. The first phase includes a sequential set of events which are described in this Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP). The molecular initiating event (MIE) is covalent binding to skin proteins (specifically, to cysteine and/or lysine residues) which leads to keratinocytes&#39; activation, a key event (KE) at cellular level. Another key event at cellular level is activation of dendritic cells, which is caused by hapten-protein complexes as well as by signalling from activated keratinocytes. Dendritic cells subsequently mature and migrate out of the epidermis to the local lymph node where they display major histocompatibility complex molecules, which include part of the hapten-protein complex to naive T-lymphocytes (T-cells). This induces differentiation and proliferation of allergen chemical-specific memory T-cells. This signifies the consecutive KE resulting in the acquisition of sensitisation, the adverse outcome on organ level. A sensitised subject has the capacity then to mount a more accelerated secondary response to the same chemical. Thus, if exposure occurs again, at the same or a different skin site, an aggressive immune response will be elicited resulting in allergic contact dermatitis. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 396 Covalent Binding, Protein Covalent Binding, Protein KE 826 Activation, Keratinocytes Activation, Keratinocytes KE 398 Activation, Dendritic Cells Activation, Dendritic Cells KE 272 Activation/Proliferation, T-cells Activation/Proliferation, T-cells AO 827 sensitisation, skin sensitisation, skin Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Covalent Binding, Protein leads to Activation, Keratinocytes adjacent High Covalent Binding, Protein leads to Activation, Dendritic Cells adjacent High Activation, Keratinocytes leads to Activation, Dendritic Cells adjacent Moderate Activation, Dendritic Cells leads to Activation/Proliferation, T-cells adjacent High Activation/Proliferation, T-cells leads to sensitisation, skin adjacent High Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence All life stages Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link mouse Mus musculus High NCBI human Homo sapiens High NCBI Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Sex Evidence Unspecific Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, etc.) and Weight of Evidence (WoE) for the overall AOP as a basis to consider appropriate regulatory application (e.g., priority setting, testing strategies or risk assessment). More help 1. Concordance of dose-response relationships While no specific citations were found, an examination of the experimental data for selected compounds (e.g. 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) reveals general agreement among the dose-response relationships both within and between intermediate endpoints (see Annex 1 [1] ). With exceptions, there is agreement between sensitisers initiated by covalent binding to proteins and non-sensitisers tested in mice, guinea-pigs, and humans; this is especially the case for extreme and strong sensitisers but lesser so for weak and non-sensitisers. One problem is that earlier results, especially with the guinea-pig, were not dose response experiments. Chemical reactivity data show very good concordance of dose-response relationships regardless of the method. In general, available data from in vitro assays are fragmentary and often qualitative (i.e., yes/no). 2. Temporal concordance among the key events and adverse effect ; There is good agreement between the sequences of biochemical and physiological events leading to skin sensitisation (see [2] ; [3] ; [4] ; [5] ; [6] ; [7] ). 3. Strength, consistency, and specificity of association of adverse effect and initiating event There is excellent strength, as well as good consistency and high specificity, of the association between in vivo skin sensitisation and in chemico protein binding. This is especially true for reactions that have thiol as the preferred molecular target. Based on linear regression analyses, there is excellent interlaboratory/protocol correlations within and between nucleophile depletion and adduct formation methods [8] . 4. Biological plausibility, coherence, and consistency of the experimental evidence The in chemico , in vitro , and in vivo experimental evidence is logical and consistent with the mechanistic plausibility proposed by covalent reactions based on the protein binding theory ( [2] ; [3] ; [7] ). In selected cases, (e.g. 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) where the same compound has been examined in a variety of assays (see Annex 1 [1] ), the coherence and consistency of the experimental data is excellent. 5. Uncertainties, inconsistencies and data gaps. Uncertainties include the structural and physicochemical cut-offs between theoretical and measured reactivity [8] , the significance of the preferred amino acid target (e.g., cysteine versus lysine) [9] , the significance of Th1 or type 1 (IFN-&gamma;) versus Th2 or type 2 (IL-2, IL-4, IL-13) cytokine secretion profiles [10] , and sensitisation measurements in different in vivo models. Inconsistencies within the reported data are seen. Ther