AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 42 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Inhibition of Thyroperoxidase and Subsequent Adverse Neurodevelopmental Outcomes in Mammals Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help TPO Inhibition and Altered Neurodevelopment The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 42, Inhibition of Thyroperoxidase and Subsequent Adverse Neurodevelopmental Outcomes in Mammals in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Kevin M. Crofton, R3Fellows&nbsp;LLC, Durham, NC USA &lt;croftonwork@outlook.com&gt; &lt;orcid.org/0000-0003-1749-9971&gt; Mary Gilbert, National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, US EPA, RTP, NC USA &lt;gilbert.mary@epa.gov&gt; Katie Paul Friedman, National Center for Computational Toxicology, US EPA, RTP, NC USA &lt;paul-friedman.katie@epa.gov&gt; Barbara Demeneix, UMR MNHN/CNRS 7221 Evolution of Endocrine Regulations, National History Museum, Paris, France &lt;bdem@mnhn.fr&gt; Mary Sue Marty, Toxicol. Environ. Res. Consult, Dow Chemical Company, Midland, Michigan; &lt;mmarty@dow.com&gt; R. Thomas Zoeller, Biology Department, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA &lt;tzoeller@bio.umass.edu&gt; Anna Price. Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Kevin Crofton&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Kevin Crofton Mary Gilbert Katie Paul Friedman Anna Price Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.10 WPHA/WNT Endorsed Scientific Review iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on April 27, 2026 07:23 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition November 18, 2025 08:29 Thyroid hormone synthesis, Decreased November 04, 2022 09:25 Thyroxine (T4) in serum, Decreased October 10, 2022 08:52 Thyroxine (T4) in neuronal tissue, Decreased April 04, 2019 09:13 Cognitive function, decreased July 25, 2024 17:23 Hippocampal gene expression, Altered August 11, 2018 09:26 Hippocampal anatomy, Altered July 24, 2024 23:09 Hippocampal Physiology, Altered July 24, 2024 23:15 Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition leads to TH synthesis, Decreased November 04, 2022 09:27 TH synthesis, Decreased leads to T4 in serum, Decreased October 10, 2022 08:56 Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition leads to T4 in serum, Decreased November 18, 2025 08:50 T4 in serum, Decreased leads to T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased April 04, 2019 10:50 T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased leads to Hippocampal gene expression, Altered August 11, 2018 19:18 Hippocampal gene expression, Altered leads to Hippocampal anatomy, Altered August 11, 2018 19:05 Hippocampal anatomy, Altered leads to Hippocampal Physiology, Altered July 25, 2024 18:38 Hippocampal Physiology, Altered leads to Cognitive function, decreased July 26, 2024 12:57 T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Hippocampal gene expression, Altered August 11, 2018 19:40 T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Hippocampal anatomy, Altered August 11, 2018 19:34 T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Hippocampal Physiology, Altered August 11, 2018 19:44 T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Cognitive function, decreased April 27, 2026 05:59 Methimazole November 29, 2016 18:42 Propylthiouracil November 29, 2016 18:42 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This AOP describes one adverse outcome that may result from the inhibition of thyroperoxidase (TPO) during mammalian development. Chemical inhibition of TPO, the molecular-initiating event (MIE), results in decreased thyroid hormone (TH) synthesis, and subsequent reduction in circulating concentrations of THs. THs are essential for normal human brain development, both prenatally and postnatally, modulating genes critical for a normal neuroanatomical development, with subsequent effects on neurophysiology, and finally neurological function. Therefore, chemicals that interfere with TH synthesis have the potential to cause TH insufficiency that may result in adverse neurodevelopmental effects in offspring. Herein, we discuss the implications of developmental TPO inhibition for hippocampal anatomy, function, and ultimately neural function controlled by the hippocampus. The biochemistry of TPO and its essentiality for TH synthesis is well known across species. The hippocampus is known to be critically involved in cognitive, emotional, and memory function. The adverse consequences of TH insufficiency depend both on severity and developmental timing, indicating that exposure to TPO inhibitors may produce different effects at different developmental windows of exposure. It is important to note that thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is not a KE in this AOP. While TSH may play a role in feedback-driven compensatory processes, it is not directly involved in brain development. The overall weight of evidence for this AOP is strong. Gaps in our understanding include the relationship of TH-dependent gene expression and complexities of brain development. Although quantitative information at all levels of KERs is limited a number of applications of this AOP have been identified . AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help This AOP was originally started on the Chemical Mode of Action WIKI sponsored by WHO/IPCS. The MOA was originally described and published by Zoeller and Crofton (Crit Rev Toxicol 2005). Thanks to the following contributors whose work on the MOA-WIKI fostered further development on the AOP wiki: Michelle Embry, Richard Judson, Vicki Dellarco, Chihae Yang, Kevin Crofton. Zoeller RT, Crofton KM.&nbsp;&nbsp; Mode of action: developmental thyroid hormone insufficiency--neurological abnormalities resulting from exposure to propylthiouracil. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2005 Oct-Nov;35(8-9):771-81 Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 279 Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition KE 277 Thyroid hormone synthesis, Decreased TH synthesis, Decreased KE 281 Thyroxine (T4) in serum, Decreased T4 in serum, Decreased KE 280 Thyroxine (T4) in neuronal tissue, Decreased T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased KE 756 Hippocampal gene expression, Altered Hippocampal gene expression, Altered KE 757 Hippocampal anatomy, Altered Hippocampal anatomy, Altered KE 758 Hippocampal Physiology, Altered Hippocampal Physiology, Altered AO 402 Cognitive function, decreased Cognitive function, decreased Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition leads to TH synthesis, Decreased adjacent High Low TH synthesis, Decreased leads to T4 in serum, Decreased adjacent High Moderate T4 in serum, Decreased leads to T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased adjacent Moderate Moderate T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased leads to Hippocampal gene expression, Altered adjacent Moderate Low Hippocampal gene expression, Altered leads to Hippocampal anatomy, Altered adjacent Moderate Low Hippocampal anatomy, Altered leads to Hippocampal Physiology, Altered adjacent Moderate Low Hippocampal Physiology, Altered leads to Cognitive function, decreased adjacent High Moderate Thyroperoxidase, Inhibition leads to T4 in serum, Decreased non-adjacent High Moderate T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Hippocampal gene expression, Altered non-adjacent High Low T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Hippocampal anatomy, Altered non-adjacent High Low T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Hippocampal Physiology, Altered non-adjacent Moderate Low T4 in serum, Decreased leads to Cognitive function, decreased non-adjacent High Moderate Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Name Methimazole Propylthiouracil Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence During brain development High Development High Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or