AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 34 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help LXR activation leading to hepatic steatosis Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help LXR Activation to Liver Steatosis The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 34, LXR activation leading to hepatic steatosis in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Marina Goumenou Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Undefined&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version This AOP was last modified on March 13, 2024 17:59 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Activation, LXR May 21, 2024 10:33 Up Regulation, CD36 March 26, 2024 10:35 Increase, Fatty acid influx February 11, 2026 06:21 Activation, ChREBP September 16, 2017 10:14 Activation, SREBP-1c September 16, 2017 10:14 Activation, FAS September 16, 2017 10:14 Activation, SCD-1 September 16, 2017 10:14 Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) March 29, 2024 10:55 Accumulation, Triglyceride March 26, 2024 13:09 N/A, Liver Steatosis September 16, 2017 10:14 peroxisome proliferator activated receptor promoter demethylation September 16, 2017 10:14 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction February 11, 2026 07:06 Activation, LXR leads to Up Regulation, CD36 December 03, 2016 16:37 Up Regulation, CD36 leads to Increase, FA influx March 27, 2024 10:00 Activation, LXR leads to Activation, ChREBP December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, LXR leads to Activation, SREBP-1c December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, LXR leads to Activation, FAS December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, LXR leads to Activation, SCD-1 December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, SCD-1 leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, ChREBP leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, SREBP-1c leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation, FAS leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) December 03, 2016 16:37 Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) leads to Accumulation, Triglyceride March 29, 2024 12:11 Increase, FA influx leads to Accumulation, Triglyceride March 29, 2024 12:08 Accumulation, Triglyceride leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction March 13, 2024 17:57 demethylation, PPARg promoter leads to Up Regulation, CD36 November 29, 2016 20:10 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help Liver steatosis (fatty liver) is considered as one of the first manifestations of possible hepatotoxicity, however it is not regarded as an adverse effect per se and usually can be reversible. The importance of steatosis is highlighted from the fact that it is a prerequisite for the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD is a clinicopathological condition that comprises a wide spectrum of liver damage, ranging from steatosis alone to steatohepatitis, advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis. Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) represents only a stage in the spectrum of NAFLD and is defined pathologically by the presence of steatosis together with necro-inflammatory activity. The clinical implications of NAFLD are derived mostly from its potential to progress to end-stage liver disease, whereas simple uncomplicated steatosis follows a relatively benign course in most patients. Steatosis is the output of the disturbance on the homeostasis of hepatic lipids which depends on the dynamic balance of several pathways including fatty acid (FA) uptake, de novo FA synthesis, &beta;-oxidation, and very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) secretion. It is characterized by the accumulation of lipid droplets (mainly triglycerides) in the hepatocytes. This AOP describes the linkage between hepatic steatosis triggered by nuclear receptors activation (PPAR gamma and LXR) through modulation of genes responsible for lipid homeostasis [the carbohydrate response element binding protein (ChREBP), the sterol response element binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), the free fatty acid uptake transporter FAT/CD36, the fatty acid synthase (FAS), the stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1)] which subsequently leasds to in rease of de novo fatty acids/triglycerides synthesis and fat influx from the peripheral tissues to liver. The accumulation of lipid in the hepatocytes can cause cytoplasm displacement, nucleus distortion, mitochondrial toxicity and eventually necrosis and/or apoptosis. The progression of this condition can lead to tissue inflammation (steatohepatitis) and fibrosis with the involvement of other cells of the hepatic tissue like the Kupffer (inflammation) and the stellate (fibrosis) cells. This purely qualitative AOP description is plausible, the scientific data supporting the AOP are logic, coherent and consistent and there is temporal agreement between the individual KEs. Quantitative data on dose-response-relationships and temporal sequences between key events are still lacking; the provision of quantitative data will strengthen the weight of evidence and make the AOP applicable for chemical risk assessment purposes. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 167 Activation, LXR Activation, LXR MIE 228 peroxisome proliferator activated receptor promoter demethylation demethylation, PPARg promoter KE 54 Up Regulation, CD36 Up Regulation, CD36 KE 115 Increase, Fatty acid influx Increase, FA influx KE 66 Activation, ChREBP Activation, ChREBP KE 264 Activation, SREBP-1c Activation, SREBP-1c KE 116 Activation, FAS Activation, FAS KE 258 Activation, SCD-1 Activation, SCD-1 KE 89 Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) KE 291 Accumulation, Triglyceride Accumulation, Triglyceride KE 177 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction AO 345 N/A, Liver Steatosis N/A, Liver Steatosis Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Activation, LXR leads to Up Regulation, CD36 adjacent Not Specified Up Regulation, CD36 leads to Increase, FA influx adjacent Not Specified Activation, LXR leads to Activation, ChREBP adjacent Not Specified Activation, LXR leads to Activation, SREBP-1c adjacent Not Specified Activation, LXR leads to Activation, FAS adjacent Not Specified Activation, LXR leads to Activation, SCD-1 adjacent Not Specified Activation, SCD-1 leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) adjacent Not Specified Activation, ChREBP leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) adjacent Not Specified Activation, SREBP-1c leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) adjacent Not Specified Activation, FAS leads to Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) adjacent Not Specified Synthesis, De Novo Fatty Acid (FA) leads to Accumulation, Triglyceride adjacent Not Specified Increase, FA influx leads to Accumulation, Triglyceride adjacent Not Specified Accumulation, Triglyceride leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction adjacent Not Specified demethylation, PPARg promoter leads to Up Regulation, CD36 adjacent Moderate Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, etc.) and Weight of Evidence (WoE) for the overall AOP as 