AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 54 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Inhibition of Na+/I- symporter (NIS) leads to learning and memory impairment Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help NIS inhibition and learning and memory impairment The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 54, Inhibition of Na+/I- symporter (NIS) leads to learning and memory impairment in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Alexandra Rolaki, Francesca Pistollato, Sharon Munn and Anna Bal-Price* (*corresponding author: anna.price@ec.europa.eu) European Commission Joint Research Centre, Directorate F - Health, Consumers and Reference Materials, Ispra, Italy Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Anna Price&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Anna Price Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.28 WPHA/WNT Endorsed Scientific Review iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on April 27, 2026 07:23 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Decrease of Thyroidal iodide April 04, 2019 09:00 Thyroxine (T4) in neuronal tissue, Decreased April 04, 2019 09:13 Reduced levels of BDNF April 04, 2019 09:21 Decrease of synaptogenesis September 16, 2017 10:14 Impairment, Learning and memory April 27, 2026 05:48 Thyroxine (T4) in serum, Decreased October 10, 2022 08:52 Decrease of GABAergic interneurons April 04, 2019 09:33 Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) April 27, 2026 05:31 Decrease of neuronal network function May 28, 2018 11:36 Thyroid hormone synthesis, Decreased November 04, 2022 09:25 Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) leads to Thyroidal Iodide, Decreased May 29, 2018 07:24 Thyroidal Iodide, Decreased leads to TH synthesis, Decreased June 04, 2018 06:11 TH synthesis, Decreased leads to T4 in serum, Decreased October 10, 2022 08:56 T4 in serum, Decreased leads to T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased April 04, 2019 10:50 T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased leads to BDNF, Reduced April 04, 2019 10:55 BDNF, Reduced leads to GABAergic interneurons, Decreased January 19, 2018 06:23 GABAergic interneurons, Decreased leads to Synaptogenesis, Decreased January 19, 2018 06:27 Synaptogenesis, Decreased leads to Neuronal network function, Decreased May 25, 2018 10:14 Neuronal network function, Decreased leads to Impairment, Learning and memory July 15, 2022 08:41 Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) leads to Impairment, Learning and memory April 27, 2026 05:47 TH synthesis, Decreased leads to Impairment, Learning and memory April 27, 2026 05:52 TH synthesis, Decreased leads to BDNF, Reduced April 04, 2019 11:02 TH synthesis, Decreased leads to GABAergic interneurons, Decreased May 29, 2018 10:11 BDNF, Reduced leads to Synaptogenesis, Decreased April 04, 2019 11:05 BDNF, Reduced leads to Impairment, Learning and memory May 29, 2018 05:55 Perchlorate November 29, 2016 18:42 Nitrate November 29, 2016 18:42 Thiocyanate November 29, 2016 18:42 Dysidenin November 29, 2016 18:42 Aryltrifluoroborates November 29, 2016 18:42 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help The thyroid hormones (TH) are essential for brain development, maturation, and function as they regulate the early key developmental processes such as neurogenesis, cell migration, proliferation, myelination and neuronal and glial differentiation. Normal human brain development and cognitive function relays on sufficient production of TH during the perinatal period. The function of Na+/I- symporter (NIS) is critical for the physiological production of TH levels in the serum, as it is a membrane bound glycoprotein that mediates the transport of iodide form the bloodstream into the thyroid cells, and this constitutes the initial step for TH synthesis. NIS is a well-studied target of chemicals, and its inhibition results in decreased TH synthesis and its secretion into blood leading to subsequent TH insufficiency in the brain with detrimental effects in neurocognitive function in children. The present AOP describes causative links between inhibition of NIS function (the molecular initiating event) leading to the decreased levels of TH in the blood and consequently in the brain, causing learning and memory deficit in children (Adverse outcome). Three key events of this AOP (decrease of TH synthesis; T4 in serum and T4 in neuronal tissue) are common with AOP 42. Learning and memory depend upon the coordinated action of different brain regions and neurotransmitter systems creating functionally integrated neural networks. Hippocampus and cortex are the most critical brain structures involved in the process of cognitive functions (also learning and memory) in rodents and primates, including man. The overall weight of evidence for this AOP is strong. The function of NIS and its essentiality for TH synthesis is well known across species, however, quantitative information of KERs is limited. &nbsp; AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 424 Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) KE 425 Decrease of Thyroidal iodide Thyroidal Iodide, Decreased KE 277 Thyroid hormone synthesis, Decreased TH synthesis, Decreased KE 281 Thyroxine (T4) in serum, Decreased T4 in serum, Decreased KE 280 Thyroxine (T4) in neuronal tissue, Decreased T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased KE 381 Reduced levels of BDNF BDNF, Reduced KE 851 Decrease of GABAergic interneurons GABAergic interneurons, Decreased KE 385 Decrease of synaptogenesis Synaptogenesis, Decreased KE 386 Decrease of neuronal network function Neuronal network function, Decreased AO 341 Impairment, Learning and memory Impairment, Learning and memory Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) leads to Thyroidal Iodide, Decreased adjacent High High Thyroidal Iodide, Decreased leads to TH synthesis, Decreased adjacent High High TH synthesis, Decreased leads to T4 in serum, Decreased adjacent High Moderate T4 in serum, Decreased leads to T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased adjacent Moderate Low T4 in neuronal tissue, Decreased leads to BDNF, Reduced adjacent Moderate Low BDNF, Reduced leads to GABAergic interneurons, Decreased adjacent Moderate Low GABAergic interneurons, Decreased leads to Synaptogenesis, Decreased adjacent Moderate Low Synaptogenesis, Decreased leads to Neuronal network function, Decreased adjacent Low Low Neuronal network function, Decreased leads to Impairment, Learning and memory adjacent High Low Inhibition, Na+/I- symporter (NIS) leads to Impairment, Learning and memory non-adjacent Moderate Low TH synthesis, Decreased leads to Impairment, Learning and memory non-adjacent High Moderate TH synthesis, Decreased leads to BDNF, Reduced non-adjacent Low Low TH synthesis, Decreased leads to GABAergic interneurons, Decreased non-adjacent Low Low BDNF, Reduced leads to Synaptogenesis, Decreased non-adjacent Moderate Low BDNF, Reduced leads to Impairment, Learning and memory non-adjacent Moderate Moderate Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Name Perchlorate Nitrate Thiocyanate Dysidenin Aryltrifluoroborates Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence Foetal High Perinatal High During brain development High Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link Homo sapiens Homo sapiens High NCBI Rattus sp. Rattus sp. High NCBI S