AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 38 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Protein Alkylation leading to Liver Fibrosis Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Protein Alkylation to Liver Fibrosis The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 38, Protein Alkylation leading to Liver Fibrosis in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Brigitte Landesmann F3 Chemical Safety and Alternative Methods Unit incorporating EURL ECVAM Directorate F &ndash; Health, Consumers and Reference Materials Joint Research Centre, European Commission brigittelandesmann (at) gmail.com Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Brigitte Landesmann&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Brigitte Landesmann Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.14 WPHA/WNT Endorsed Adverse Outcome Pathway on Protein Alkylation Leading to Liver Fibrosis This AOP was last modified on October 03, 2025 07:55 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Increase, Liver fibrosis February 11, 2026 05:35 Alkylation, Protein September 16, 2017 10:14 Increase, Cell injury/death May 27, 2024 07:23 Increase, Hepatic stellate cell activation February 11, 2026 07:04 Increase, Collagen accumulation February 11, 2026 06:58 Tissue resident cell activation November 15, 2024 10:51 Increased Pro-inflammatory mediators September 17, 2024 08:35 Alkylation, Protein leads to Cell injury/death November 29, 2016 20:02 Cell injury/death leads to Tissue resident cell activation August 02, 2018 03:02 Tissue resident cell activation leads to Increased pro-inflammatory mediators August 02, 2018 03:37 Increased pro-inflammatory mediators leads to Increase, HSC activation August 02, 2018 03:43 Increase, HSC activation leads to Increase, Collagen accumulation December 05, 2018 08:51 Increase, Collagen accumulation leads to Increase, Liver fibrosis December 05, 2018 08:52 Cell injury/death leads to Increase, HSC activation April 21, 2026 02:55 Allyl Alcohol November 29, 2016 21:18 Carbon tetrachloride November 29, 2016 21:18 Retinol November 29, 2016 21:20 Dimethyl nitrosamine November 29, 2016 21:19 Thioacetamide November 29, 2016 21:20 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help Hepatotoxicity in general is of special interest for human health risk assessment. Liver fibrosis in particular is an important human health issue associated with chemical exposure and predictive assays are lacking; it is a typical result of chronic or repeated-dose toxic injury and one of the considered endpoints for regulatory purposes. It is a long-term process in which inflammation, tissue destruction, and repair occur simultaneously, together with sustained production of growth factors and fibrogenic cytokines due to a complex interplay between various hepatic cell types, various receptors and signalling pathways which lead to an imbalance between the deposition and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and a change of ECM composition. Due to this complex situation an adequate cell model is not available and an in vitro evaluation of fibrogenic potential is therefore not feasible. A sufficiently detailed description of the AOP to liver fibrosis might support chemical risk assessment by indicating early (upstream) markers for downstream events and facilitate a testing strategy without the need for a sophisticated cell model. This systematic and coherent display of currently available mechanistic-toxicological information can serve as a knowledge-based repository for identification/selection/development of in vitro methods suitable for measuring key events (KEs) and their relationships along the AOP and to facilitate the use of alternative data for regulatory purposes. Identified uncertainties and knowledge gaps can direct future research by priority setting and targeted testing. The KE descriptions can be used for hazard identification and read-across to assess the toxic potential of an untested substance. This AOP describes the linkage between hepatic injury caused by protein alkylation and the formation of liver fibrosis. The molecular initiating event (MIE) is protein alkylation, leading to structural and functional cell injury and further to cell death, the first KE. Apoptotic hepatocytes undergo genomic DNA fragmentation and formation of apoptotic bodies. Upon engulfment of apoptotic bodies Kupffer cells (KCs) are activated, the next KE along the pathway. Activated KCs are the main source of TGF-&beta;1, the most potent profibrogenic cytokine. TGF-&beta;1 expression therefore is considered a KE that causes the next KE, hepatic stellate cell (HSCs) activation, meaning the transdifferentiation from a quiescent vitamin A&ndash;storing cell to a proliferative and contractile myofibroblast, the central effector in hepatic fibrosis. Activated HSCs cause progressive collagen accumulation, which together with changes in ECM composition signifies the KE on tissue level. The excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix proteins progressively affects the whole organ and alters its normal functioning, which corresponds to liver fibrosis, the adverse outcome (AO). There are two further events that play an important role in driving fibrogenesis, namely oxidative stress and chronic inflammation. Both are on-going processes being present throughout the pathway and interconnected with most of the KEs. Hence, they are not classified as KEs themselves and described in the individual KE and key event relationship (KER) descriptions. The inflammatory response plays an important role in driving fibrogenesis, since persistent inflammation precedes fibrosis. Inflammatory signalling stems from injured hepatocytes, activated KCs and HSCs. Inflammatory and fibrogenic cells stimulate each other in amplifying fibrosis. Chemokines and their receptors provoke further fibrogenesis, as well as interacting with inflammatory cells to modify the immune response during injury. Oxidative stress, as well, plays a crucial role in liver fibrogenesis by inducing hepatocyte apoptosis, activation of KCs and HSCs and fuelling inflammation. ROS contributing to oxidative stress are generated by hepatocytes, KCs, HSCs and inflammatory cells. This purely qualitative AOP description is plausible, the scientific data supporting the AOP are logic, coherent and consistent and there is temporal agreement between the individual KEs. Quantitative data on dose-response-relationships and temporal sequences between KEs are still lacking; the provision of quantitative data will further strengthen the weight of evidence and make the AOP applicable for a wide range of purposes. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 244 Alkylation, Protein Alkylation, Protein KE 55 Increase, Cell injury/death Cell injury/death KE 1492 Tissue resident cell activation Tissue resident cell activation KE 1493 Increased Pro-inflammatory mediators Increased pro-inflammatory mediators KE 265 Increase, Hepatic stellate cell activation Increase, HSC activation KE 68 Increase, Collagen accumulation Increase, Collagen accumulation AO 344 Increase, Liver fibrosis Increase, Liver fibrosis Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Alkylation, Protein leads to Cell injury/death adjacent Moderate Cell injury/death leads to Tissue resident cell activation adjacent High Tissue resident cell activation leads to Increased pro-inflammatory mediators adjacent High Increased pro-inflammatory mediators leads to Increase, HSC activation adjacent High Increase, HSC activation leads to Increase, Collagen accumulation adjacent High Increase, Collagen accumulation leads to Increase, Liver fibrosis adjacent High Cell injury/death leads to Increase, HSC activation non-adjacent High Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that a