AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 16 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Acetylcholinesterase inhibition leading to acute mortality Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help AChE inhibition - acute mortality The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 16, Acetylcholinesterase inhibition leading to acute mortality in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help CHRISTINE L. RUSSOM (1), DANIEL L. VILLENEUVE* (2), VIRGINIA HENCH (3), CATAIA IVES (3), VIRGINIA C. MOSER (1), CARLIE A. LALONE (2), STEPHEN EDWARDS (3), KRISTIE SULLIVAN (4), and GERALD T. ANKLEY (2) (1) U.S.&nbsp;Environmental Protection Agency (Retired) (2) National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, Mid-Continent Ecology Division, US Environmental Protection Agency, Duluth, Minnesota, USA (3) Research Computing Division, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA (4)&nbsp;Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine,&nbsp;Washington, DC, USA Corresponding author for wiki entry (Villeneuve.dan@epa.gov) Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Dan Villeneuve&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Dan Villeneuve Ginnie Hench Cataia Ives Kristie Sullivan Evangelos-Panagiotis Daskalopoulos Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.3 Under Development This AOP was last modified on April 29, 2023 16:02 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Increased Mortality July 08, 2022 07:32 Acetylcholinesterase (AchE) Inhibition April 29, 2020 17:21 Acetylcholine accumulation in synapses June 26, 2020 13:06 Respiratory distress/arrest December 20, 2019 15:42 Increased Cholinergic Signaling December 20, 2019 17:32 Dysregulation of heart rate and vascular tone December 20, 2019 16:02 Decrease, Population growth rate January 03, 2023 09:09 AchE Inhibition leads to Increased Cholinergic Signaling December 20, 2019 11:07 AchE Inhibition leads to ACh Synaptic Accumulation September 10, 2023 19:16 ACh Synaptic Accumulation leads to Increased Cholinergic Signaling December 20, 2019 09:16 AchE Inhibition leads to Respiratory distress/arrest December 20, 2019 11:47 Increased Cholinergic Signaling leads to Respiratory distress/arrest December 20, 2019 09:51 AchE Inhibition leads to Cardiovascular dysregulation December 20, 2019 14:56 Increased Cholinergic Signaling leads to Cardiovascular dysregulation December 20, 2019 15:05 Cardiovascular dysregulation leads to Respiratory distress/arrest December 19, 2019 16:16 Respiratory distress/arrest leads to Increased Mortality December 20, 2019 10:26 AchE Inhibition leads to Increased Mortality December 20, 2019 17:33 Increased Mortality leads to Decrease, Population growth rate July 08, 2022 08:29 AchE Inhibition leads to Decrease, Population growth rate December 20, 2019 16:49 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help The contents of this AOP page represent an interconnected network of AOPs linking the MIE of acetylcholinesterase inhibition to the AO of acute mortality. Both AOPs include the KE of acetylcholine accumulation at the synapses, which results in excessive signaling from cholinergic neurons on a broad range of tissues throughout the body. Respiratory failure is the predominant mechanism leading to acute mortality in humans (Satoh, 2006). While these two AOPs are represented on the basis of their most plausible linkages to acute mortality, other known symptoms of acetylcholinesterase inhibition mediated through actions on other receptors and tissues may also play a role (see Russom et al. 2014). Overall, there is strong evidence supporting the linkage of acetylcholinesterase inhibition and acetylcholine accumulation with acute mortality, but the precise contribution of the different organ-level effects across different species isn&rsquo;t completely understood. This network of AOPs as a whole, including the indirect KERs depicted, supports the potential utility of in vitro or short-term in vivo measures of acetylcholinesterase inhibition for identifying chemicals with potential to cause acute mortality across a broad range of species. Caution is needed when interpreting the in vitro results, however, because well known chemical initiators of these AOPs are known to require metabolic activation, which can result in false negatives. In contrast, detoxification of these compounds is sometimes deficient in the young resulting in life stage differences in response to different chemicals that act through this mechanism. Toxicokinetics is also variable across species making this a major determinant of species sensitivity. At present, quantitative understanding is not sufficiently complete to accurately predict apical outcomes or potency from in vitro measurements alone, and the chemical-specific ADME and toxicokinetic considerations will be strong determinant of quantitative outcomes. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 12 Acetylcholinesterase (AchE) Inhibition AchE Inhibition KE 10 Acetylcholine accumulation in synapses ACh Synaptic Accumulation KE 39 Increased Cholinergic Signaling Increased Cholinergic Signaling KE 445 Respiratory distress/arrest Respiratory distress/arrest KE 1703 Dysregulation of heart rate and vascular tone Cardiovascular dysregulation AO 351 Increased Mortality Increased Mortality AO 360 Decrease, Population growth rate Decrease, Population growth rate Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding AchE Inhibition leads to ACh Synaptic Accumulation adjacent High Moderate ACh Synaptic Accumulation leads to Increased Cholinergic Signaling adjacent High Low Increased Cholinergic Signaling leads to Respiratory distress/arrest adjacent High Low Increased Cholinergic Signaling leads to Cardiovascular dysregulation adjacent High High Cardiovascular dysregulation leads to Respiratory distress/arrest adjacent Low Low Respiratory distress/arrest leads to Increased Mortality adjacent High Low Increased Mortality leads to Decrease, Population growth rate adjacent Moderate Moderate AchE Inhibition leads to Increased Cholinergic Signaling non-adjacent AchE Inhibition leads to Respiratory distress/arrest non-adjacent Moderate Low AchE Inhibition leads to Cardiovascular dysregulation non-adjacent AchE Inhibition leads to Increased Mortality non-adjacent High Moderate AchE Inhibition leads to Decrease, Population growth rate non-adjacent Low Low Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence All life stages High Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Sex Evidence Unspecific High Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, etc.) and Weight of Evidence (WoE) for the overall AOP as a basis to consider appropriate regulatory application (e.g., priority setting, testing strategies or risk assessment). More help Domain of Applicability Addressess the relevant biological domain(s) of applicability in terms of sex, life-stage, taxa, and other aspects of biological context. More help Life Stage Applicability The key molecular target is the AChE enzyme, which appears to be available in all life stages of ve