AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 27 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Cholestatic Liver Injury induced by Inhibition of the Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Cholestatic Liver Injury induced by Inhibition of the Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 27, Cholestatic Liver Injury induced by Inhibition of the Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Mathieu Vinken, Brigitte Landesmann, Marina Goumenou, Stefanie Vinken, Imran Shah, Hartmut Jaeschke, Catherine Willett, Maurice Whelan and Vera Rogiers. Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Mathieu Vinken&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Mathieu Vinken Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.19 Under Development This AOP was last modified on April 03, 2025 16:42 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Inhibition, Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) September 16, 2017 10:14 Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change September 16, 2017 10:14 Bile accumulation, Pathological condition September 16, 2017 10:14 Release, Cytokine September 16, 2017 10:14 Increase, Inflammation February 28, 2024 06:33 Peptide Oxidation November 13, 2017 10:22 Cholestasis, Pathology December 03, 2016 16:33 Increase, Reactive oxygen species June 12, 2025 01:27 Bile accumulation, Pathological condition leads to Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change December 03, 2016 16:37 Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change leads to Cholestasis, Pathology December 03, 2016 16:37 Release, Cytokine leads to Increase, Inflammation December 03, 2016 16:37 Increase, ROS leads to Peptide Oxidation April 03, 2025 16:34 Inhibition, Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) leads to Bile accumulation, Pathological condition December 03, 2016 16:38 Bile accumulation, Pathological condition leads to Release, Cytokine December 03, 2016 16:38 Increase, Inflammation leads to Cholestasis, Pathology December 03, 2016 16:38 Peptide Oxidation leads to Cholestasis, Pathology December 03, 2016 16:38 Bile accumulation, Pathological condition leads to Increase, ROS April 03, 2025 16:34 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) have been recently introduced in human risk assessment as pragmatic tools with multiple applications. As such, AOPs intend to provide a clear-cut mechanistic representation of pertinent toxicological effects. AOPs are typically composed of a molecular initiating event, a series of intermediate steps and key events, and an adverse outcome. In the current study, an AOP framework is proposed for cholestasis triggered by drug-mediated inhibition of the bile salt export pump transporter protein. For this purpose, an in-depth survey of relevant scientific literature was carried out in order to identify intermediate steps and key events. The latter include bile accumulation, the induction of oxidative stress and inflammation, and the activation of specific nuclear receptors. Collectively, these mechanisms drive both a deteriorative cellular response, which underlies directly caused cholestatic injury, and an adaptive cellular response, which is aimed at counteracting cholestatic insults. AOP development was performed according to OECD guidance, including critical consideration of the Bradford Hill criteria for weight of evidence assessment and the OECD key questions for evaluating AOP confidence. The postulated AOP is expected to serve as the basis for the development of new in vitro tests and the characterization of novel biomarkers of drug-induced cholestasis. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 41 Inhibition, Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) Inhibition, Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) KE 288 Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change KE 214 Bile accumulation, Pathological condition Bile accumulation, Pathological condition KE 87 Release, Cytokine Release, Cytokine KE 149 Increase, Inflammation Increase, Inflammation KE 1115 Increase, Reactive oxygen species Increase, ROS KE 209 Peptide Oxidation Peptide Oxidation AO 357 Cholestasis, Pathology Cholestasis, Pathology Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Bile accumulation, Pathological condition leads to Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change adjacent High Activation of specific nuclear receptors, Transcriptional change leads to Cholestasis, Pathology adjacent High Release, Cytokine leads to Increase, Inflammation adjacent High Increase, ROS leads to Peptide Oxidation adjacent High Inhibition, Bile Salt Export Pump (ABCB11) leads to Bile accumulation, Pathological condition adjacent High Bile accumulation, Pathological condition leads to Release, Cytokine adjacent High Increase, Inflammation leads to Cholestasis, Pathology adjacent Moderate Peptide Oxidation leads to Cholestasis, Pathology adjacent Moderate Bile accumulation, Pathological condition leads to Increase, ROS adjacent High Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence Adult, reproductively mature High Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link humans Homo sapiens High NCBI Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Sex Evidence Mixed High Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, etc.) and Weight of Evidence (WoE) for the overall AOP as a basis to consider appropriate regulatory application (e.g., priority setting, testing strategies or risk assessment). More help 1. Concordance of dose-response relationships: Morgan and colleagues investigated the potential of more than 200 benchmark drugs to inhibit BSEP. As much as 16% of the tested drugs displayed high potency of BSEP inhibition (IC50 ≤ 25 µM), the majority of which are associated with liver liabilities in humans (Morgan et al., 2010). Likewise, 17 of 85 pharmaceuticals tested by Dawson and coworkers inhibited BSEP (IC50 ≤ 100 µM), all which are known to cause DILI (Dawson et al., 2011). Furthermore, several of the BSEP-inhibiting drugs cause cholestastic liver injury in a dose-dependent way, such as is the case for troglitazone and bosentan in rats (Funk et al., 2001) and humans (Fattinger et al., 2001), respectively. Thus, there is a clear relationship between the IC50 of BSEP inhibition and the occurrence of (cholestatic) DILI. 2. Temporal concordance among the key events and adverse effect: Inhibition of BSEP activity and the resulting accumulation of bile acids primarily triggers a direct cellular response, which is associated with deteriorative processes, such as inflammation, oxidative stress and cell death. It also causes a secondary and rather indirect cellular response, which is adaptive in nature. Indeed, a well-orchestrated network of mechanisms is activated, all of which are targeted towards the elimination of bile from the liver (Boyer, 2009; Zollner and Trauner, 2006 and 2008; Wagner et al., 2009). The temporal concordance between these cellular responses is n