AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 48 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Binding of agonists to ionotropic glutamate receptors in adult brain causes excitotoxicity that mediates neuronal cell death, contributing to learning and memory impairment. Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help ionotropic glutamatergic receptors and cognition The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 48, Binding of agonists to ionotropic glutamate receptors in adult brain causes excitotoxicity that mediates neuronal cell death, contributing to learning and memory impairment. in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Magdalini Sachana, Sharon Munn, Anna Bal-Price European Commission Joint Research Centre, Institute for Health and Consumer Protection, Ispra, Italy Corresponding author: anna.price@ec.europa.eu Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Anna Price&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Anna Price Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.23 WPHA/WNT Endorsed iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on April 29, 2023 16:02 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction February 11, 2026 07:06 Impairment, Learning and memory April 27, 2026 05:48 Increase, Cell injury/death May 27, 2024 07:23 N/A, Neurodegeneration February 23, 2021 05:07 Overactivation, NMDARs July 14, 2024 11:45 Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload June 26, 2020 04:45 Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain September 16, 2017 10:15 Binding of agonist, Ionotropic glutamate receptors September 16, 2017 10:15 Neuroinflammation July 15, 2022 09:54 Overactivation, NMDARs leads to Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload September 10, 2023 20:11 Cell injury/death leads to N/A, Neurodegeneration September 10, 2023 19:25 Neuroinflammation leads to N/A, Neurodegeneration February 23, 2021 05:47 N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Neuroinflammation June 13, 2018 09:35 Binding of agonist, Ionotropic glutamate receptors leads to Overactivation, NMDARs November 29, 2016 20:44 Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction November 29, 2016 20:08 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Cell injury/death November 29, 2016 20:08 Cell injury/death leads to Neuroinflammation July 15, 2022 08:26 Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain leads to Impairment, Learning and memory November 29, 2016 20:23 N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain November 29, 2016 20:24 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help Under physiological conditions activation of glutamate ionotropic receptors such as N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDARs), alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPARs) and kainate (KARs) is responsible for basal excitatory synaptic transmission and main forms of synaptic plasticity such as long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) that are fundamental for learning and memory processes (Schrattenholz and Soskic, 2006). However, sustained (direct or indirect) over-activation of these receptors can induce excitotoxic neuronal cell death. Indeed, mainly increased Ca2+ influx through NMDARs promotes many pathways of toxicity due to generation of free radical species, reduced ATP production, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and protein aggregation. Neuronal injury induced by over-activation of these receptors and the excessive Ca2+ influx is considered an early key event of excitotoxicity. Additionally, the excessive activation of NMDARs has been found to play a significant role in a variety of neurological disorders ranging from acute hypoxic-ischemic brain injury (Barenger et al., 2001) to chronic neurodegenerative diseases (Mehta et al., 2013). The proposed AOP is relevant to adult neurotoxicity testing. A molecular initiating event (MIE) has been defined as a direct binding of agonists to NMDARs or indirect, through prior activation of AMPARs and/or KARs resulting in sustained NMDARs over-activation causing excitotoxic neuronal cell death, mainly in hippocampus and cortex, two brain structures fundamental for learning and memory processes. The AOP is based on the empirical support describing (1) domoic acid (DomA) induced excitotoxicity triggered by indirect (through KARs/AMPARs) NMDARs over-activation leading to impaired learning and memory and (2) glufosinate (GLF) induced excitotoxicity that through direct binding to NMDARs causes convulsions and memory loss (Lanz et al., 2014). GLF is the methylphosphine analog of L-glutamate, used as a component of bactericidal and fungicidal herbicidal. DomA, a natural toxin that accumulates in mussels and shellfish is also an analogue of L-glutamate and among the most prominent features described after human exposure to DomA is memory impairment (Lefebvre and Robertson, 2010). DomA and GLF are described as the examples of the stressors due to large amounts of published data (especially in the case of DomA), however this AOP is relevant to any agonist that directly or indirectly cause NMDARs over-activation. Some of the known agonists selective for the NMDARs are derived from the naturally occurring amino acids such as ibotenic acid, homocysteine and l-aspartate and polyamines like spermidine. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 875 Binding of agonist, Ionotropic glutamate receptors Binding of agonist, Ionotropic glutamate receptors KE 177 Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction KE 55 Increase, Cell injury/death Cell injury/death KE 352 N/A, Neurodegeneration N/A, Neurodegeneration KE 388 Overactivation, NMDARs Overactivation, NMDARs KE 389 Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload KE 618 Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain KE 188 Neuroinflammation Neuroinflammation AO 341 Impairment, Learning and memory Impairment, Learning and memory Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Overactivation, NMDARs leads to Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload adjacent Moderate Cell injury/death leads to N/A, Neurodegeneration adjacent Moderate Neuroinflammation leads to N/A, Neurodegeneration adjacent Moderate N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Neuroinflammation adjacent Moderate Binding of agonist, Ionotropic glutamate receptors leads to Overactivation, NMDARs adjacent High Increased, Intracellular Calcium overload leads to Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction adjacent High Moderate Increase, Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to Cell injury/death adjacent Moderate Low Cell injury/death leads to Neuroinflammation adjacent Low Low Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain leads to Impairment, Learning and memory adjacent Moderate Low N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Decreased, Neuronal network function in adult brain adjacent Low Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence Adults High Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link human Homo sapiens High NCBI mouse Mus musculus High NCBI rat Rattus norvegicus High NCBI Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Sex Evidence M