AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 12 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Chronic binding of antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) during brain development leads to neurodegeneration with impairment in learning and memory in aging Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Binding of antagonist to NMDARs can lead to neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 12, Chronic binding of antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) during brain development leads to neurodegeneration with impairment in learning and memory in aging in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Florianne Tschudi-Monnet, Department of Physiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland, and Swiss Center for Applied Human Toxicology (SCAHT), Florianne.Tschudi-Monnet@unil.ch, corresponding author Rex FitzGerald, SCAHT, Universit&auml;t Basel, Missionsstrasse 64, CH-4055 Basel, Rex.FitzGerald@unibas.ch Acknowledgments: The authors greatly acknowledged the contribution of Drs Anna Price and Magda Sachana who prepared the MIE and KE1-KE4 as well as the related KERs of this AOP. Anna Price, Joint Research Centre Institute for Health and Consumer Protection Systems Toxicology Unit Via E. Fermi 2749 - 21020 - Ispra (VA) -Italy, e-mail address: PRICE Anna &lt;Anna.PRICE@ec.europa.eu&gt; Magdalini Sachana, Joint Research Centre Institute for Health and Consumer Protection Systems Toxicology Unit Via E. Fermi 2749 - 21020 - Ispra (VA) -Italy, present e-mail address: &quot;Magdalini.SACHANA@oecd.org&quot; &lt;Magdalini.SACHANA@oecd.org&gt; Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Florianne Tschudi-Monnet&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Florianne Tschudi-Monnet Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.13 WPHA/WNT Endorsed Scientific Review iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on April 29, 2023 16:02 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Inhibition, NMDARs September 16, 2017 10:14 N/A, Neurodegeneration February 23, 2021 05:07 Decreased, Calcium influx June 13, 2018 08:26 Binding of antagonist, NMDA receptors June 13, 2018 08:23 Reduced levels of BDNF April 04, 2019 09:21 Increase, Cell injury/death May 27, 2024 07:23 Neuroinflammation July 15, 2022 09:54 Impairment, Learning and memory April 27, 2026 05:48 Binding of antagonist, NMDA receptors leads to Inhibition, NMDARs June 13, 2018 08:48 Inhibition, NMDARs leads to Decreased, Calcium influx April 07, 2018 04:32 Decreased, Calcium influx leads to BDNF, Reduced June 13, 2018 09:00 BDNF, Reduced leads to Cell injury/death November 29, 2016 20:07 Cell injury/death leads to Neuroinflammation July 15, 2022 08:26 Neuroinflammation leads to N/A, Neurodegeneration February 23, 2021 05:47 N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Impairment, Learning and memory April 11, 2024 15:23 N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Neuroinflammation June 13, 2018 09:35 Lead November 29, 2016 18:42 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This AOP is an extension of AOP 13 linking NMDAR chronic inhibition during brain development to impairment of learning and memory. It links chronic NMDA receptors inhibition during brain development to Adverse Outcomes, i.e. neurodegeneration in hippocampus and cortex with amyloid plaque deposition and tau hyperphosphorylation and impairment of learning and memory, which are considered as hallmark of Alzheimer&#39;s disease. It introduces another KE, Neuroinflammation, which is involved in several neurodegenerative diseases. With Neuroinflammation and Neurodegeneration, this AOP connects to AOP 48, where in adult brain, &laquo;&nbsp;neuroinflammation&nbsp;&raquo; leads to &laquo;&nbsp;Neurodegeneration&nbsp;&raquo;&nbsp;; &laquo;&nbsp;Neurodegeneration&nbsp;&raquo; leads to &laquo;&nbsp;Decreased neuronal network function&nbsp;&raquo;, which finally leads to &laquo;&nbsp;Impairement of learning and memory&nbsp;&raquo;. Both neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits are observed in Alzheimer&rsquo;s pathology. But as neurodegenerative diseases are complex and multifactorial, the authors proposed two Adverse outcomes: one at the organism level &laquo;&nbsp;Impairment of learning and memory&raquo;, and one at the organ level, &laquo;&nbsp;neurodegeneration&nbsp;&raquo;. Both are regulatory endpoints. This AOP integrates in the network of AOPs relative to neurotoxicity testing. This AOP is based on the hypothesis of Landrigan and coworkers (2005) proposing an early origin of neurodegenerative diseases in later life. The chemical initiator known to block NMDARs and used in this AOP for the empirical support is lead (Pb), which is a well-known developmental neurotoxicant. In epidemiological studies of adults, cumulative lifetime lead exposure has been associated with accelerated decline in cognition (Bakulski et al., 2012), suggesting that long term exposure to lead during brain development or occupational exposure in adulthood increases the risk to develop a neurodegenerative disease of Alzheimer&#39;s type. The long latency period between exposure and late-onset of neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits gives a very broad life-stage applicability, where developmental exposure has consequences in the aging brain. Such a long temporal delay between exposure and adverse outcome is a real difficulty and challenge for neurotoxicity testing. As the Key Event &laquo;&nbsp;Neuroinflammation&nbsp;&raquo; appears to play a crucial role in the neurodegenerative process, the authors propose to include the measurement of this apical KE in the battery of regulation-required neurotoxicity testing. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 201 Binding of antagonist, NMDA receptors Binding of antagonist, NMDA receptors KE 195 Inhibition, NMDARs Inhibition, NMDARs KE 52 Decreased, Calcium influx Decreased, Calcium influx KE 381 Reduced levels of BDNF BDNF, Reduced KE 55 Increase, Cell injury/death Cell injury/death KE 188 Neuroinflammation Neuroinflammation AO 352 N/A, Neurodegeneration N/A, Neurodegeneration AO 341 Impairment, Learning and memory Impairment, Learning and memory Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Binding of antagonist, NMDA receptors leads to Inhibition, NMDARs adjacent High Inhibition, NMDARs leads to Decreased, Calcium influx adjacent Moderate Decreased, Calcium influx leads to BDNF, Reduced adjacent Low BDNF, Reduced leads to Cell injury/death adjacent Low Cell injury/death leads to Neuroinflammation adjacent Moderate Neuroinflammation leads to N/A, Neurodegeneration adjacent Low N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Impairment, Learning and memory adjacent High N/A, Neurodegeneration leads to Neuroinflammation adjacent Moderate Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Name Lead Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence During brain development Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link human Homo sapiens Low NCBI Monkey Monkey High NCBI rat Rattus norvegicus High NCBI mouse Mus musculus Moderate NCBI zebrafish Danio rerio Moderate NCBI Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, et