AOP-Wiki AOPs Key Events KE Relationships Prototypical Stressors Event Components Developers' Handbook Login Register Table of Contents AOP Title Graphical Representation Authors Abstract AOP Development Strategy Context Strategy Summary of the AOP Events Relationships Between Two Key Events Network View Prototypical Stressors Life Stage Applicability Taxonomic Applicability Sex Applicability Overall Assessment of the AOP Domain of Applicability Essentiality of the Key Events Evidence Assessment Known Modulating Factors Quantitative Understanding Considerations for Potential Applications of the AOP References View history Discussion Snapshots Scientific Review API XML This AOP is licensed under the BY-SA license . This license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator. The license allows for commercial use. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms. AOP: 25 Title A descriptive phrase which references both the Molecular Initiating Event and Adverse Outcome.It should take the form “MIE leading to AO”. For example, “Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction” where Aromatase inhibition is the MIE and reproductive dysfunction the AO. In cases where the MIE is unknown or undefined, the earliest known KE in the chain (i.e., furthest upstream) should be used in lieu of the MIE and it should be made clear that the stated event is a KE and not the MIE. More help Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction Short name A name that succinctly summarises the information from the title. This name should not exceed 90 characters. More help Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction The current version of the Developer&#39;s Handbook will be automatically populated into the Handbook Version field when a new AOP page is created.Authors have the option to switch to a newer (but not older) Handbook version any time thereafter. More help Handbook Version v1.0 Graphical Representation A graphical representation of the AOP.This graphic should list all KEs in sequence, including the MIE (if known) and AO, and the pair-wise relationships (links or KERs) between those KEs. More help Click to download graphical representation template Explore AOP in a Third Party Tool Additional AOP Exploration Options Click links below to explore AOP 25, Aromatase inhibition leading to reproductive dysfunction in tools offered by third parties. Close Authors The names and affiliations of the individual(s)/organisation(s) that created/developed the AOP. More help Dan Villeneuve, US EPA Mid-Continent Ecology Division (villeneuve.dan@epa.gov) Point of Contact The user responsible for managing the AOP entry in the AOP-KB and controlling write access to the page by defining the contributors as described in the next section. More help Dan Villeneuve&nbsp;&nbsp; (email point of contact) Contributors Users with write access to the AOP page. Entries in this field are controlled by the Point of Contact. More help Dan Villeneuve Ryan Staub Coaches This field is used to identify coaches who supported the development of the AOP.Each coach selected must be a registered author. More help OECD Information Table Provides users with information concerning how actively the AOP page is being developed and whether it is part of the OECD Workplan and has been reviewed and/or endorsed. OECD Project: Assigned upon acceptance onto OECD workplan. This project ID is managed and updated (if needed) by the OECD. OECD Status: For AOPs included on the OECD workplan, ‘OECD status’ tracks the level of review/endorsement of the AOP . This designation is managed and updated by the OECD. Journal-format Article: The OECD is developing co-operation with Scientific Journals for the review and publication of AOPs, via the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding. When the scientific review of an AOP is conducted by these Journals, the journal review panel will review the content of the Wiki. In addition, the Journal may ask the AOP authors to develop a separate manuscript (i.e. Journal Format Article) using a format determined by the Journal for Journal publication. In that case, the journal review panel will be required to review both the Wiki content and the Journal Format Article. The Journal will publish the AOP reviewed through the Journal Format Article. OECD iLibrary published version: OECD iLibrary is the online library of the OECD. The version of the AOP that is published there has been endorsed by the OECD. The purpose of publication on iLibrary is to provide a stable version over time, i.e. the version which has been reviewed and revised based on the outcome of the review. AOPs are viewed as living documents and may continue to evolve on the AOP-Wiki after their OECD endorsement and publication. More help OECD Project # OECD Status Reviewer's Reports Journal-format Article OECD iLibrary Published Version 1.12 WPHA/WNT Endorsed iLibrary link This AOP was last modified on April 01, 2024 16:34 Revision dates for related pages Page Revision Date/Time Decrease, Population growth rate January 03, 2023 09:09 Inhibition, Aromatase May 27, 2026 11:22 Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations September 26, 2017 11:30 Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver May 27, 2026 11:37 Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development May 27, 2026 11:43 Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells May 27, 2026 11:21 Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning March 20, 2017 17:52 Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations May 27, 2026 11:36 Inhibition, Aromatase leads to Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells November 30, 2016 13:27 Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells leads to Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations March 20, 2017 12:05 Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations leads to Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver March 20, 2017 12:28 Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning leads to Decrease, Population growth rate March 20, 2017 13:49 Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development leads to Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning March 20, 2017 13:35 Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations leads to Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development March 20, 2017 13:21 Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver leads to Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations March 20, 2017 12:58 Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations leads to Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations October 18, 2018 11:02 Fadrozole November 29, 2016 18:42 Abstract A concise and informative summation of the AOP under development that can stand-alone from the AOP page. The aim is to capture the highlights of the AOP and its potential scientific and regulatory relevance. More help This adverse outcome pathway details the linkage between inhibition of gonadal aromatase activity in females and reproductive dysfunction, as measured through the adverse effect of reduced cumulative fecundity and spawning. Initial development of this AOP draws heavily on evidence collected using repeat-spawning fish species. Cumulative fecundity is the most apical endpoint considered in the OECD 229 Fish Short Term Reproduction Assay. The OECD 229 assay serves as screening assay for endocrine disruption and associated reproductive impairment (OECD 2012). Cumulative fecundity is one of several variables known to be of demographic significance in forecasting fish population trends. Therefore, this AOP has utility in supporting the application of measures of aromatase, or in silico predictions of the ability to inhibit aromatase, as a means to identify chemicals with known potential to adversely affect fish populations and potentially other oviparous vertebrates. AOP Development Strategy Context Used to provide background information for AOP reviewers and users that is considered helpful in understanding the biology underlying the AOP and the motivation for its development.The background should NOT provide an overview of the AOP, its KEs or KERs, which are captured in more detail below. More help Strategy Provides a description of the approaches to the identification, screening and quality assessment of the data relevant to identification of the key events and key event relationships included in the AOP or AOP network.This information is important as a basis to support the objective/envisaged application of the AOP by the regulatory community and to facilitate the reuse of its components. Suggested content includes a rationale for and description of the scope and focus of the data search and identification strategy/ies including the nature of preliminary scoping and/or expert input, the overall literature screening strategy and more focused literature surveys to identify additional information (including e.g., key search terms, databases and time period searched, any tools used). More help Summary of the AOP This section is for information that describes the overall AOP.The information described in section 1 is entered on the upper portion of an AOP page within the AOP-Wiki. This is where some background information may be provided, the structure of the AOP is described, and the KEs and KERs are listed. More help Events: Molecular Initiating Events (MIE) An MIE is a specialised KE that represents the beginning (point of interaction between a prototypical stressor and the biological system) of an AOP. More help Key Events (KE) A measurable event within a specific biological level of organisation. More help Adverse Outcomes (AO) An AO is a specialized KE that represents the end (an adverse outcome of regulatory significance) of an AOP. More help Type Event ID Title Short name MIE 36 Inhibition, Aromatase Inhibition, Aromatase KE 219 Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations KE 285 Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver KE 309 Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development KE 3 Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells KE 78 Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning KE 221 Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations AO 360 Decrease, Population growth rate Decrease, Population growth rate Relationships Between Two Key Events (Including MIEs and AOs) This table summarizes all of the KERs of the AOP and is populated in the AOP-Wiki as KERs are added to the AOP.Each table entry acts as a link to the individual KER description page. More help Title Adjacency Evidence Quantitative Understanding Inhibition, Aromatase leads to Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells adjacent High Moderate Reduction, 17beta-estradiol synthesis by ovarian granulosa cells leads to Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations adjacent High Moderate Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations leads to Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver adjacent High Moderate Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning leads to Decrease, Population growth rate adjacent Moderate Moderate Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development leads to Reduction, Cumulative fecundity and spawning adjacent Moderate Moderate Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations leads to Reduction, Vitellogenin accumulation into oocytes and oocyte growth/development adjacent Moderate Low Reduction, Vitellogenin synthesis in liver leads to Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations adjacent High Moderate Reduction, Plasma 17beta-estradiol concentrations leads to Reduction, Plasma vitellogenin concentrations non-adjacent High Moderate Network View This network graphic is automatically generated based on the information provided in the MIE(s), KEs, AO(s), KERs and Weight of Evidence (WoE) summary tables. The width of the edges representing the KERs is determined by its WoE confidence level, with thicker lines representing higher degrees of confidence. This network view also shows which KEs are shared with other AOPs. More help Show names Hide AOPs Hide Nonadjacent Reset Positions Prototypical Stressors A structured data field that can be used to identify one or more “prototypical” stressors that act through this AOP. Prototypical stressors are stressors for which responses at multiple key events have been well documented. More help Name Fadrozole Life Stage Applicability The life stage for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Life stage Evidence Adult, reproductively mature Taxonomic Applicability Latin or common names of a species or broader taxonomic grouping (e.g., class, order, family) can be selected.In many cases, individual species identified in these structured fields will be those for which the strongest evidence used in constructing the AOP was available. More help Term Scientific Term Evidence Link medaka Oryzias latipes Moderate NCBI zebrafish Danio rerio Moderate NCBI fathead minnow Pimephales promelas High NCBI Sex Applicability The sex for which the AOP is known to be applicable. More help Sex Evidence Female High Overall Assessment of the AOP Addressess the relevant biological domain of applicability (i.e., in terms of taxa, sex, life stage, etc.) and Weight of Evidence (WoE) for the overall AOP as a basis to consider appropriate regulatory application (e.g., priority setting, testing strategies or risk assessment). More help Domain of Applicability Addressess the relevant biological domain(s) of applicability in terms of sex, life-stage, taxa, and other aspects of biological context. More help Sex : The AOP applies to females only. Males have relatively low gonadal aromatase expression and activity and the androgen 11-KT, rather than the estrogen E2 is a stronger driver of reproductive functions in males. That said, at least in fish, there is a potential autocrine and paracrine for estrogens synthesized in the brain in regulating reproductive behaviors. However, those potential effects are addressed through an alternative AOP that shares the MIE of aromatase inhibition. Life stages : The relevant life stages for this AOP are reproductively mature adults. This AOP does not apply to adult stages that lack a sexually mature ovary, for example as a result of seasonal or environmentally-induced gonadal senescence (i.e., through control of temperature, photo-period, etc. in a laboratory setting). Taxonomic : At present, the assumed taxonomic applicability domain of this AOP is class